God Sees the Truth, But Waits

"God Sees the Truth, But Waits"
Author	Leo Tolstoy
Country	Russia

Audiobook version of God Sees the Truth, But Waits by Leo Tolstoy
"God Sees the Truth, But Waits" (Russian: "Bog pravdu vidit da ne skoro skazhet") is a short story by Russian author Leo Tolstoy first published in 1872. The story, about a man sent to prison for a murder he didnt commit, takes the form of a parable of forgiveness. English translations were also published under titles "The Confessed Crime" and "Exiled to Siberia". The concept of the story of a man wrongfully accused of murder and banished to Siberia also appears in one of Tolstoys previous works, War and Peace, during a philosophical discussion between two characters who relate the story and argue how the protagonist of their story deals with injustice and fate.

Contents

1	Synopsis
2	Adaptations
3	See also

Synopsis

Ivan Dmitrich Aksionov is a merchant living in Vladimir, a town in Russia. Although Aksionov is prone to drinking, he is not violent, and he is responsible and well liked by people that know him. One day he decides to go to a fair as a business venture, but his wife pleads for him not to go because of a nightmare she had the previous night in which he had greyed hair. Aksionov disregards his wifes dream and leaves for the fair.

Aksionov meets another merchant on his way, and the two decide to travel together. They check into an inn and have a good time drinking. Then they retire separately. Aksionov wakes early in the next morning to get to the fair and leaves without the other merchant. Not far down the road, Aksionov is stopped by policemen. They explain a merchant was just murdered and robbed, and then they search Aksionovs bag. They find a bloody knife, and despite Aksionovs claims that he is not the murderer, he is sentenced and sent to Siberia. After his trial flogging, his wife can finally visit him, and she sees that Aksionovs hair has begun to go gray from the stress.

Aksionov spends 26 years in Siberia. Resigned to his plight, he dedicates his life to God. He becomes a mediator of sorts in the prison, and he is well respected by the other prisoners as well as the guards. One day some new prisoners, one of them being Makar Semyonich, are transferred to the prison. After overhearing several conversations, Aksionov is convinced that Makar Semyonich is the man who committed the murder for which he was blamed.

One day the guards notice that someone had been strewing dirt around the grounds, and they search the prison and find a tunnel. Aksionov had found out earlier that it was Makar Semyonich that was digging the hole, but after being questioned by the police, Aksionov declares that it is not his place to speak about the matter. Makar Semyonich approaches Aksionov later that day in a terrible state, and he eventually admits to Aksionov that it was he who killed the merchant. Aksionov forgives Semyonich, and he feels as if a terrible weight had been lifted. Makar Semyonich confesses to the authorities, and the process for Aksionov to be cleared is begun. Unfortunately, Aksionov dies before he can reach home, but he dies in peace.

Adaptations

It was adapted into television series Katha Sagar (1986), directed by Shyam Benegal.

It was adapted into a CBS Radio Mystery Theatre program All Things Are Possible (1978), directed by Himan Brown.

Stephen Kings novella Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption is based on Tolstoys story.[1] It was adapted into a feature film, The Shawshank Redemption (1994), starring Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman.[2]

See also

 Bibliography of Leo Tolstoy